NGINX Ingress Controller Release 5.1.0 (#730)
nginx/documentation: content/nic/releases.md

- [7808](https://github.com/nginx/kubernetes-ingress/pull/7808) Update kubernetes version to v1.33.1 in helm schema
- [7896](https://github.com/nginx/kubernetes-ingress/pull/7896) Update go version to 1.24.4

### <i class="fa-solid fa-download"></i> Upgrade

- For NGINX, use the 5.1.0 images from our
[DockerHub](https://hub.docker.com/r/nginx/nginx-ingress/tags?page=1&ordering=last_updated&name=5.1.0),
[GitHub Container](https://github.com/nginx/kubernetes-ingress/pkgs/container/kubernetes-ingress),
[Amazon ECR Public Gallery](https://gallery.ecr.aws/nginx/nginx-ingress) or [Quay.io](https://quay.io/repository/nginx/nginx-ingress).
- For NGINX Plus, use the 5.1.0 images from the F5 Container registry or build your own image using the 5.1.0 source code
- For Helm, use version 2.2.0 of the chart.

> ### <i class="fa-solid fa-life-ring"></i> Supported Platforms

Author: next release will we use the shortcode- thanks for the headsup.

nd-content-type: reference
nd-product: NIC
nd-docs: DOCS-616
---
## 5.1.0

30 Jun 2025

> This NGINX Ingress Controller release brings initial connectivity to the NGINX One Console! You can now use NGINX One Console to manage NGINX instances that are part of your NGINX Ingress Controller cluster.
> 

Reviewer: Not ready, and will be covered by PR 736

```suggestion
```

> This release also includes the ability to configure Rate Limiting for your APIs based on a specific NGINX variable and its value. This allows you more granular control over how frequently specific users access your resources.

Author: ```suggestion
This release includes the ability to configure Rate Limiting for your APIs based on a specific NGINX variable and its value. This allows you more granular control over how frequently specific users access your resources.
```

> Lastly, in our previous release of v5.0.0, we removed support for Open Tracing. This release brings back this observability capability through native NGINX Open Telemetry Traces allowing you to monitor the internal traffic of your applications.

Author: ```suggestion
Lastly, in our previous v5.0.0 release, we removed support for Open Tracing. This release replaces that observability capability with native NGINX Open Telemetry traces, allowing you to monitor the internal traffic of your applications.
```

### <i class="fa-solid fa-rocket"></i> Features
- [7642](https://github.com/nginx/kubernetes-ingress/pull/7642) Add OpenTelemetry support

> - [7916](https://github.com/nginx/kubernetes-ingress/pull/7916) Add support for Agent V3 and Connecting to NGINX One Console

Author: ```suggestion
- [7916](https://github.com/nginx/kubernetes-ingress/pull/7916) Add support for Agent V3
```
